ACTING EARLY
WHEN THE
WORLD ISN’T
WATCHING
LESSONS FROM
ANTICIPATORY
ACTION IN
ETHIOPIA IN 2021
1
Credits
Cover photo: On 10 May 2022 in the internally displaced person (IDP) site of Guyah, Afar Region, Ethiopia, 13-year-old Keria fetches water from a UNICEF
supported water point. Credit: UNICEF/Sewunet
Content:
Kate Katch, kate.katch@un.org
Acting early when the world
isn’t watching
Lessons from anticipatory
action in Ethiopia in 2021
Highlights
• For Ethiopia, living with climate volatility requires • Three out of five recipients of assistance report-
anticipating droughts and floods and mitigating ed an improved ability to afford food, livelihood
their impact on the most vulnerable people. inputs and household bills.
• In 2020, OCHA facilitated an anticipatory ac- • In a world where humanitarian crises compete
tion framework in Ethiopia to get ahead of for political attention and resources, Ethiopia
droughts and reduce their impact on vulnerable proves that anticipatory action frameworks make
communities. acting early the default.
• OCHA activated the pilot framework in December • The pilot taught valuable lessons in how to im-
2020, while political and humanitarian focus was prove anticipatory action’s impact in the context
on the Tigray conflict in Ethiopia. of protracted and overlapping crises.
• The Central Emergency Response Fund released
US$20 million to reduce the drought’s impact on
more than 900,000 people. The allocation was
one of the earliest responses to the 2020-2022
drought.
Seeds ready for distribution at Chereti woreda,Tofik Kebele on 13 June 2021. Credit: FAO/Tewelde
3
Summary
When a country is hit by a sudden disaster – an But this time there was a glimmer of hope. The
earthquake, a tsunami or floods – the impact is humanitarian community acted earlier thanks to
immediate, the crisis makes headlines and aid the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitari-
often follows. But when a country is hit by a slow- an Affairs (OCHA) piloting an anticipatory action
moving disaster, such as a drought, it can take framework. In December 2020 – earlier than any
months or even years to see the devastating impact. other donor – OCHA’s Central Emergency Response
These crises unfold in slow motion: crops fail, Fund (CERF) provided US$20 million to humanitari-
livestock die, people sell their assets and leave their an partners to reduce the drought’s impact on more
homes, women and girls risk their safety as they than 900,000 people.
walk further to find water, and children are pulled
from school. According to a satisfaction survey caried out by
60_decibels, more than 60 per cent of the recipients
Droughts are predictable, but they too often fail to of assistance reported improvements in their
receive funding until suffering reaches catastrophic overall quality of life.1 The pilot framework also
levels and dramatic images hit the media. This has taught valuable lessons in what anticipatory action
been Ethiopia’s experience, time and time again. means in a prolonged and complex crisis. As
Joyce Msuya, the Assistant Secretary-General for
Between October 2020 and June 2022, Ethiopia Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief
experienced five consecutive below-average rainy Coordinator, concluded:
seasons, with the 2022 March-May season being
the driest in 70 years. The drought’s prolonged “In 2024, drought is once again driving millions of
nature ultimately affected an estimated people to suffer. The Ethiopia anticipatory action
17 million people. pilot demonstrated that if we act earlier, people’s
lives will be better. We have the evidence, now we
must scale.”
1 Ethiopia survey report by 60 Decibels.
Firtun Yakob Omar, 21 a mother of 2(L) and her father Yakob Omar Menur, 52 a father of 18 (R) dropping seeds in their farmland supported by FAO in
Dolo-Ado woreda, Kelemisge kebele on 12 June 2021. Credit: FAO/Tewelde
4
18 July 2022. Eli Dar, Afar region. Eli Dar, Afar region. A girl, Fatima, walks with a water container. In eastern Afar, the community at the outskirts of the
town of Eli Dar have been experiencing the impact of drought. The grounds that would normally provide a year or more worth of water for the village
dried up about 6 months ago and temperatures in the area are into the 40s. Credit: OCHA/Loh-Taylor
Challenge
Ethiopia is highly vulnerable to severe seasonal is now more opportunity to limit the humanitarian
droughts; it has experienced them every decade impact of droughts. However, despite early warning
since 1953. They are compounded by conflict, information, the humanitarian community has re-
locust invasions, high food prices and localized peatedly struggled to act due to a lack of resources
flooding, meaning communities in Ethiopia continu- and competing global priorities.
ously receive humanitarian aid.
Following Ethiopia’s 2015-2018 droughts – the
Over CERF’s 18-year history, Ethiopia has consist- worst in 30 years – an inter-agency humanitari-
ently ranked among its top five recipient countries, an evaluation found that the response to those
having received $500 million in CERF funding. droughts saved lives, but it was not timely.2 An
Approximately 40 per cent of that funding has gone earlier response could have stopped people from
to drought relief. selling assets to purchase food and pay bills. It
could have avoided sharp increases in severe acute
As Ethiopia is one of the countries most vulner- malnutrition. Fewer children could have dropped
able to climate change, climate volatility will get out of school and many illnesses could have
worse over the coming years. Positively, advances been prevented.
in weather-and-climate forecasting means there
2 IASC, Inter-Agency Humanitarian Evaluation of the Drought Response in Ethiopia (February 2020).
5
Solution
In 2020, OCHA decided to pilot an anticipatory ac- (by June 2021). However, not all seasonal climate
tion framework in Ethiopia to see how the human- forecasts met the threshold – some were more
itarian community could get ahead of drought and certain in predicting a below-average season than
reduce its impact on vulnerable communities. others.
Anticipatory action frameworks use a model or fore- The forecasts’ uncertainty did not stop a no-regrets
cast to trigger pre-arranged funding for pre-agreed approach. To manage the risk of providing funding
activities. In essence, a framework pre-determines and a drought not occurring, CERF decided for the
exactly when funding will be released and who will first time to split the allocation in two stages. In
take what action. December 2020, it allocated $13 million to fund
activities that required a longer lead time and must
In 2020, OCHA’s Centre for Humanitarian Data happen early, such as preparing land and planting
supported Ethiopia’s humanitarian community drought-resistant crops. It then released a second
to develop a trigger for drought as the basis for allocation of $7 million in February 2021, once the
the framework. The trigger would be activated likelihood of below-average rains was confirmed.
if climate forecasts and seasonal risk analysis
suggested below-average rainfall during the coming At a time when Ethiopia had already experienced
rainy season, and if food security conditions were one failed rainy season, CERF’s funding assisted
expected to deteriorate based on projections from more than 900,000 people at a critical time, ena-
the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification.3 bling communities to make better choices for their
If the trigger was activated, CERF would provide families and supporting livelihoods before it was
$20 million to humanitarian partners for a set of too late. Unlike in previous droughts, almost half of
predetermined actions. the recipients (44 per cent) reported that the assis-
tance came at the right time.4
On 28 October 2020, the UN Humanitarian Country
Team endorsed the framework. However, just days Tens of thousands of households received short-cy-
later, Ethiopia’s Tigray crisis consumed the Govern- cle/drought-tolerant seeds, livestock packages
ment, the humanitarian community and political that included supplemental feeding, treatment and
attention. Dry conditions in south-east Ethiopia vaccination services, and unconditional cash.5 Re-
and forecasts of another failed rainy season in cipients nearly unanimously agreed the assistance
early 2021 were overlooked among the noise of the was useful.6
escalating conflict. But they were not overlooked
by the humanitarian community. It had resources As one recipient noted: “My family benefited from
and an agreed plan to translate early warning into the assistance, as we used the money to buy food
action, thanks to the anticipatory action framework items. In addition, we spent the money to take care
in place. of our children, and the animal feed support was
also helpful for our livestock, as there was inade-
By late November 2020, four regions in Ethiopia quate pasture.” Food and Agriculture Organization
met the food insecurity criteria. Almost 13 million anticipatory action recipient.7
people were projected to experience crisis or emer-
gency levels of food insecurity within six months
3 The IPC Acute Food Insecurity classification differentiates between different levels of severity of acute food insecurity. IPC3+ refers to the crisis
phase, characterized by a significant lack of food access, high levels of acute malnutrition, and excess mortality.
4 Ethiopia survey report by 60 Decibels.
5 CERF Anticipatory Action Report 2021.
6 E. Easton-Calabria et al, Anticipatory Action in Complex Crises: Lessons from Ethiopia (December, 2023).
7 E. Easton-Calabria et al, Anticipatory Action in Complex Crises: Lessons from Ethiopia (December, 2023).
6
On 10 May 2022 in the internally displaced person (IDP) site of Guyah, Afar Region, Ethiopia, 13-year-old Keria (left) and another girl, fetch water from a
UNICEF supported water point. Credit: UNICEF/ Sewunet
By utilizing existing community-based struc- To prevent 13,000 children from dropping out of
tures – such as religious institutions, kebele (small school, almost 3,000 households – mostly female
administrative unit) leaders, marketplaces, school headed – received cash or vouchers to support
clubs and local radio stations – almost 250,000 education costs. A follow-up survey indicated that
community members learned about drought-related 100 per cent of the respondents used the cash to
protection risks.8 buy school materials. In another survey, 90 per cent
of the respondents stated the cash helped ensure
More than 80,000 people were able to access safe their children’s continued access to education.11
drinking water through the early rehabilitation of
boreholes and non-functioning water schemes Overall, anticipatory action helped to prevent
and water piping, including in health facilities and drought-related suffering. A satisfaction survey
schools. A further 25,000 children received water in conducted by 60_decibels found that three out of
school during the drought.9 five recipients noted an overall improvement in their
quality of life due to their increased ability to afford
Access to clean water meant less disease. As one food, livelihood inputs and household bills.12
recipient observed: “The aid improved and secured
our family hygiene and health. We’ve been able to
prevent communicable diseases.” United Nations
Population Fund anticipatory action recipient.10
8 CERF Anticipatory Action Report 2021.
9 CERF Anticipatory Action Report 2021.
10 Ethiopia survey report by 60 Decibels.
11 CERF Anticipatory Action Report 2021.
12 CERF Anticipatory Action Report 2021.
7
Takeaway
For Ethiopia, living with climate volatility will require CERF’s $20 million grant was approximately 1 per
anticipating droughts and floods, and mitigating cent of the overall requirements of the Humanitar-
their impact on the most vulnerable people. Ulti- ian Response Plan in 2021, and funding require-
mately, more climate adaptation is required, but the ments for the 2020-2022 drought response were
humanitarian community also has an important only half met.14 It is therefore understandable that
role to play. The pilot in Ethiopia demonstrates that 49 per cent of the recipients interviewed in 2022
anticipatory action holds promise. said the anticipatory action assistance hardly met
or met none of their drought-related needs.15
In a world where humanitarian crises compete for
political attention and resources, Ethiopia illustrates As Lisa Doughten, Director of OCHA’s Financing and
that anticipatory action frameworks make acting Partnerships Division, noted: “CERF funding contin-
early the default. ues to be an indispensable enabler for anticipatory
action, but to truly scale up its impact, more flexible
Catherine Sozi, the former UN Resident and Human- and coordinated financing is needed.”
itarian Coordinator for Ethiopia, explained: “In late
2020 and 2021, media headlines, political atten- In addition to exposing the impact of funding
tion and resources were focused on the COVID-19 constraints, the pilot also yielded lessons in how to
pandemic, the Tigray crisis in Ethiopia, a military increase the impact of anticipatory action.
coup in Myanmar, the Taliban takeover in Afghani-
stan and a large-scale earthquake in Haiti. No one Julia Wittig, Anticipatory Action Lead for CERF,
was paying attention to failed rains in Ethiopia. The explained: “The pilot helped us to further refine the
anticipatory action framework meant we could act type of activities and the timing of those interven-
when it would make a difference to communities. tions. For example, some activities, such as prepar-
We didn’t need to wait for people to suffer and the ing land and distributing seed, must happen early
drought to make the headlines.” and require a longer lead time. But they are critical
to food consumption and preventing negative cop-
The pilot also revealed valuable lessons about ing strategies later. The decision to split the CERF
anticipatory action’s place in the context of pro- allocation allowed us to time interventions for when
tracted and overlapping crises and an underfunded they make the difference, while mitigating the risks
response. of releasing funding before a drought is certain.”
Anticipatory action is intended to mitigate the im- Improving collective targeting can also help to
pact of one shock, such as drought. CERF funding maximize impact. Humanitarian partners jointly
came after the first failed rains (October-December identified districts for assistance, but aid was often
2020), but households had to endure five consec- distributed to different households with different
utive below-average rainy seasons (October 2020 packages of support. The 60_decibels survey
to June 2022).13 Communities also had to live with illustrated a more granular approach, where human-
drought alongside other crises, such as conflict, itarian partners identify the most vulnerable house-
localized flooding, a locust invasion and inflation. holds to assist with an intersectoral package of
support. This could have led to better outcomes for
It’s also important to consider the scale of antic- those families.16 OCHA and humanitarian partners
ipatory action compared to the size of the need. are pursuing collective targeting for anticipatory
13 Ethiopia survey report by 60 Decibels.
14 OCHA, Financial Tracking System. Note, the 2021 Ethiopia Humanitarian Response Plan was not exclusive to needs generated by the drought but
was a major component. The 2022 Ethiopia Humanitarian Response Plan was in response to the drought and the Tigray crisis.
15 Ethiopia survey report by 60 Decibels.
16 Ethiopia survey report by 60 Decibels.
8
action frameworks in Bangladesh, Burkina Faso, action frameworks in Burkina Faso, the Central
Chad and Niger. American Dry Corridor, Chad and Niger.
Ethiopia also helped to improve future anticipatory Overall, the pilot successfully mitigated some of the
action triggers for droughts. Ethiopia shows that drought’s impact on vulnerable households. Impor-
food security assessments are crucial to determine tantly, it proved that anticipatory action works, gen-
the population’s vulnerability and where to prior- erating momentum in the humanitarian community
itize aid. However, the assessments require some to get ahead of climate shocks. OCHA will update
improvements to serve as a trigger for anticipatory and renew Ethiopia’s anticipatory action framework
action. in 2024, with CERF pre-committing $15 million.
Willem Muhren, Head of OCHA’s Information Man- Given the drought pilot’s success, and recognizing
agement Unit in Ethiopia, said: “Food security as- the multiple risks Ethiopia faces, a new collective
sessments are published after the rainy season so anticipatory action framework for floods will be
they can estimate what will happen with the food explored. This is part of OCHA’s portfolio of pre-ar-
security situation. This is too late, for example, if we ranged funding of more than $100 million in 15
want to plant drought-resistant seeds. We need to countries for storms, floods, droughts and cholera.
get ahead of the shock, not just respond earlier.”
As Ethiopia confronts another drought in 2024,
Since the pilot in Ethiopia, OCHA is focusing on more flexible funding for anticipatory action is
climate indicators for drought-related anticipatory needed. As Ms. Msuya concluded: “now is the time
to scale.”
On 12 May 2022 at a UNICEF MY Home/Bete school Dubti, Afar Region, Ethiopia, Ibrahim Ali (left) attends a class designed to provide a safe space for
boys and girls living amid humanitarian emergencies by integrating accelerated learning, child protection and skills development. Credit: UNICEF
9