THE CENTRE FOR HUMANITARIAN DATA
The OCHA Centre for Humanitarian Data is focused on Our priorities in 2024
increasing the use and impact of data in humanitarian
response.
Closing data gaps in priority humanitarian operations.
According to our latest State of Open Humanitarian
Our vision
Data report, we estimate that 73 percent of relevant,
complete data is available across 25 locations with
We want to create a future where everyone involved in a
humanitarian crises.
humanitarian response can access the data they need,
when and how they need it, to make informed and
Supporting OCHA’s anticipatory action frameworks
responsible decisions. through the development and monitoring of trigger
mechanisms in over ten countries.
Our workstreams
Activating adoption of the OCHA Data Responsibility
Guidelines and the IASC Operational Guidance on
Data Responsibility.
Promoting learning resources and guidelines and
offer training to help humanitarians be more confident
using data.
DATA SERVICES
We manage the Humanitarian Data Exchange (HDX),
OCHA’s open platform for sharing data across crises and Our locations
organizations. Launched in 2014, HDX will mark 10 years
The Centre is based in the Netherlands in The Hague
of operations this year.
Humanity Hub, a co-working space for organizations
focused on social impact. The Centre has a small
number of staff in The Hague and is further supported
by geographically-distributed teams in Bangkok, Dakar,
Geneva, Nairobi, and New York, among other locations.
DATA SCIENCE
We use data science and risk analysis to drive preemptive The Centre will help humanitarians
decision making for humanitarian action. We assess models to make informed and responsible
and forecasts for use in anticipatory action and provide
decisions to meet people’s most urgent
guidance on climate science and technical language.
needs.
UN Secretary-General António Guterres
Contact us
DATA RESPONSIBILITY
We develop guidance and processes for managing We are here to help! Let us know how we can support
sensitive data in a safe, ethical and effective way. your data work. We offer free services to the
We coordinate global inter-agency forums to increase humanitarian community ranging from data cleaning
awareness and adoption of responsible data practices in to assessing disclosure risk of sensitive data or creating
the humanitarian sector. custom data visualizations.
Get involved
• Visit HDX to find and use humanitarian data, or sign
up for an account to make your organization’s data
accessible to partners around the world.
LEARNING AND PRACTICE
We offer in-person and remote training opportunities • Help us improve our services by signing up to
to improve the data skills and expertise of humanitarians participate in ongoing user research.
in technical and non-technical roles.
Website: centre.humdata.org | Mailing list: bit.ly/humdatamailing | X: @humdata | YouTube: bit.ly/HumDataYouTube | LinkedIn: bit.ly/humdatalinkedin | Email: centrehumdata@un.org